           4.  Another odd thing in the W etymologies, carried
over into the L, is the practice of using “more
at—” as a cross reference indicator.  For example, at
lento , after showing it to have come, via Italian, from
Latin lentus `slow,' one reads “more at LITHE.”  But if
you look up the etymology for lithe you discover only
that the original form of that word ( lithe in Old English)
is “akin to... Latin lentus slow.”  My objection
to the form of the reference is that its wording suggests,
“there is more information about the etymology
of lento to be found under lithe ,” but that does not
actually turn out to be the case: all the user has
learned is that lento and lithe are (or might be) cognates.
In the event, why not just say “cogn: lithe ”
under lento and the reverse under lithe ?  (This latter
piece of information is unaccountably lacking.)

            5.  Compare the entries for literally in the two
dictionaries:



W 1: in a literal sense or manner: ACTUALLY
< took the remark ˜ > < was ˜ insane > 2 : in
effect: VIRTUALLY < will ˜ turn the world upside
down to combat cruelty or injustice—Norman
Cousins >

usage Since sense 2 is the opposite in meaning
of sense 1, it has been frequently criticized as a
misuse.  Instead, the use is pure hyperbole intended
to gain emphasis, but it often appears
in contexts where no additional emphasis is
necessary.

L 1 in the literal sense; without metaphor or
exaggeration 2 with exact equivalence; verbatim
< follow the instructions ˜ > 3 — used to intensify
a metaphorical or hyperbolic expression
< she was ˜ — tearing her hair out >; disapproved
of by some speakers
            

            To be sure, the W usage note, even with its verbosity
and the oxymoron “pure hyperbole,” is more
helpful than L 's cryptic “disapproved of by some
speakers”; but the definitions are better in L because
they assume that if a user does not know the meaning
of literally , then that of literal is unlikely to be that
obvious.  On the other hand, “figurative or exaggerated
expression” would probably have been a simplified improvement
over “metaphorical or hyperbolic expression,”
which might be tough going for someone who
had to look up literally to begin with.

            Users of the L will be far better off if spared the
technique of defining in the W , carried over from the
Third Unabridged , in which the full explanatory definition
is abandoned in favor of a scattering of synonyms
set in SMALL CAPITALS, which, more often than
not, are likely to lead the user who has the paitence to
pursue them to other words defined in the same inept
manner.  There is a difference between using a word
in a phrasal definition and suggesting it as a—
presumably substitutable—synonym.  In the present
case, ACTUALLY is such a loosely used “filler” word in
the language (like really , I mean , y'know , etc.) as to be
almost useless as a substitute (except “literally”).

            In general, the definitions in W have been clarified,
simplified, and made more precise in L .  Also, the
citations in W have either been omitted, where unnecessary,
or paraphrased, and sources are not given.  I
have never understood why, in a dictionary of this size,
W ever thought it useful to give the sources of citations,
especially inconsistently: who among the general,
college-dictionary-using population of today
knows the identity of Norman Cousins?  Is H. G. Rickover
being held up to the user as a paragon of English
usage?  What is the significance in citing anonymous
writers, Longfellow, L. P. Smith, or giving no citation
at all?  The treatment in W is erratic, to say the least.

            6.  The entry list in L seems to be fuller than in W ,
but a quick direct comparison is not easily done.  In
one interval checked, W reveals Montague (Romeo's
family name), Montmorency (a kind of cherry), Montrachet
(wine), monuron (a herbicide), moon-eye (a
fish), moon-eyed (open-eyed), and moonflower , as
headwords not in L ; the same interval in L reveals
montbretia (a plant), Montessorian (teaching method),
month of Sundays , Montilla , -mony (suffix) Moog synthesizer ,
moon daisy (the oxeye), moon-faced , moonglow ,
and moonrat , which do not appear in W .  Leaving
aside the plants and animals, which are differently
distributed for American and British users, the only
significant omission from L is Montrachet , while the
important words omitted from W are Montessorian ,
month of Sundays , -mony , Moog synthesizer , moon-faced ,
and moonglow .  The last word is not in the RHD
               II , but it should be, for the L citation is from Henry
Miller and the word also appears in the lyrics written
for the popularized rendition of Tchaikovsky's 5th
symphony.  It should also be noted that idiomatic expressions
(e.g., once in a blue moon , listed under
moon in L ) may be listed elsewhere (under blue moon
in W ) and that others (e.g., over the moon `elated') are
not much used in American English.

            On the whole, readers can draw their own conclusions
about the breadth of coverage; as for me,
I should (regrettably) sacrifice Montrachet to gain
others.

            7.  There are lengthy usage notes and synonym
studies in W that do not appear in L at all or in greatly
abbreviated form, sometimes mercifully so, for W
occasionally succumbs to prolixity.  Notwithstanding,
such features are valued by users and cutting them
could be a disadvantage.

            8.  W has illustrations (better than those in the
Third Unabridged ); L has none, but it must be noted
that other British dictionaries lack them also, so L
need not have included them purely for competitive
reasons in the main market it is intended to serve.

            9.  Both dictionaries list abbreviations and biographical
and geographical entries in separate sections
at the back, a practice I have never liked.  Experience
(and a moment's thought) shows that names of people
and places occur with equal, sometimes greater frequency
in the language than a very large percentage of
the words listed in dictionaries of almost any size (except
the smallest), and on that ground they should not
be treated as nonwords or as being outside the pale of
lexicon.  Also, it is awkward to find Glasgow or Shake-speare
in one part of the dictionary and Glaswegian or
Shakespearian in another.  Finally, fictional people and
places are listed in the main body of those dictionaries
that include them, but real people and places appear
in the appendices; as it may be assumed that users look
up things they do not know, the immediate assumption
is that they ought to come to a reference book
already aware that Homer was a real person (despite
speculation to the contrary) and that Jesus was both
real and, as “the Jewish religious teacher,” fictional;
fundamentalists will be disturbed to discover that most
of the characters in the Bible are treated as fictional.
It seems silly to separate Gruyère the cheese from
Gruyère the place in Switzerland whence it comes—
indeed, the latter is not even an entry in the geographical
sections of either dictionary.  Of the two, the W
geographical listings seem more complete: W lists
Aylesbury , which, through some grievous, egregious
fault, is not in the geographical section of the L but
does appear in the A-Z section (because of the ducks).

            10.  Although L has, in addition to the names,
abbreviations, and only a few pages of miscellaneous
materials—Handbook of Style, Ten Vexed points in
English grammar—and some tables of moneys,
weights and measures, etc., W has short sections on
Foreign Words and Phrases (most of which are dispensable),
Signs and Symbols, and Style, as well as one
of those interminably boring listings of Colleges and
Universities that clutter up most American college
dictionaries.

            11.  L has 1876 pages, W 1562 pages.  A rough comparison
yields the following:


                             Longman   Webster
depth of column              50 picas               52 picas
width of column              67mm                   72mm
characters/line                                     70
lines/column                                        104
characters total (approx.)   18 million             22 million


            

            No allowance has been made in the above calculations
for the pronunciation key appearing on each odd-numbered
page of the W .

            12.  L is, of course, a British dictionary, W American.
But for other reasons they are not directly comparable.
The entry for Boolean in L reads as follows:



adj of or being a type of algebra in which logical
symbols are used to represent relations between
sets, and which is used entensively in the
theory of computer programming < ˜ expression
            

            Under Boolean algebra , W has the following:


a set that is closed under the two commutative
binary operations and that can be described by
any of various systems of postulates all of which
can be deduced from the postulates that an
identity element exists for each operation, that
each operation is distributive over the other, and
that for every element in the set there is another
element which when combined with the first
under one of the operations yields the identity
element of the other operation<under the operations
of taking intersections and unions, the
subsets of a given set form a Boolean algebra
            

            The definition in the Third Unabridged was a model
of clarity compared with that.  Focusing on these two
definitions, it must be conceded that naive users who
did not know the meaning of Boolean or of Boolean
algebra before going to either dictionary are unlikely
to come away any the wiser.  But the second reads like
gobbledygook while the first tries to provide some basic
notion of what is involved and where it is applied
while, at the same time, gently notifying users that
they are going to have to seek elsewhere for a proper
definition, the understanding of which requires far
more backgound in mathematics and logic than can be
assumed in the average user.

            Lexicographers constantly face problems of defining
terms that, in some instances, might require a
brief essay to explain and far more specialized knowledge
than can reasonably be expected from the user.
The source of the problem lies in the fact that there is
no law forbidding ordinary mortals to bandy about
terms like theory of relativity which only a few people
in the world truly understand: to be sure, it is impossible
to conceive of writing a definition for it that would
fit into a dictionary's procrustean requirements.  The
dilemma can be resolved either by attempting a definition
(which no one will understand) or by providing a
superficial pass at a definition couched in language
suggesting that the user can find no succor in the work
in hand.  I prefer the latter approach, though I have
of ten thought it might be only fair to mark such entries
with some symbol (like a death's head).

            Conclusion?  I think the Longman is a fine dictionary,
superior to the Webster , but I have been careful
not to compare it with the Collins , which remains
my favorite British English dictionary for reasons that
modesty forbids my detailing here.

            Laurence Urdang
         
         




            
               Computational Lexicography
            

            I recently purchased a new computer, and, because
it operated on a system different from the one of
my old computer, I asked a few friends to recommend
a word-processing package that I might.find useful.  I
was particularly interested in one that would allow me
to designate a variety of typestyles during keyboard-ing,
ideally one that showed the styles on the monitor
as the text was being typed.

            Those who are familiar with computers or do not
want to know about them should skip to the next paragraph.
For those who are unfamiliar with computers
and the need for a word-processing package, I should
explain that when you buy what is fondly call a “personal”
computer, you get three pieces of equipment
(though they may be combined in some models or
makes): a rectangular box with some slots in the front
and sockets in the back, a monitor, which is nothing but
a small TV set, and a keyboard, which looks like an
ordinary typewriter keyboard but, in many models sold
today, has a number of additional keys alongside those
for the familiar alphanumeric characters: on mine, nestled
among some control keys on the right side is what is
called a “number pad,” which resembles the key arrangement
one sees on a small adding machine or calculator;
on the left side is a double bank of five keys
marked “F1” through “F10” which, when pressed alone
or in combination with another key, perform certain
functions, some of which are useful, others of which are
evidently thought useful by the manufacturer but
which I never use.  These boxes come with wires (called
cables for some reason) that allow them to be connected
to one another and into a power source.  The trick is
that they will not do anything unless and until you have
installed what is called a Disk Operating System, which
comes with the machine.  After it has been installed, the
DOS, as it is called (once identified, nothing in computerese
is ever called by its full name again: a Personal
Computer becomes a PC; a Disk Operating System
becomes a DOS; if it is made by a company called
MicroSoft, it is called MS/DOS), performs certain functions,
though rarely any that anyone but a computer
specialist would want to perform.  In order to do something
useful, you have to buy a program, which is a
package consisting of a number of diskettes and a manual.
A diskette is also called a “floppy”; the reason for
the name is not immediately apparent (nor why the
item is called a “diskette”, for that matter), but all
becomes clear.  The so-called diskette is a flat black
square of rather tough plastic with a hole in the middle
and an oblong slot on each of the flat sides; it is said to
be 5¼ inches square, but that is a lie: as the only person
who probably ever measured one of these things, I can
tell you it is 5 3/16 inches square; that may seem irrelevant,
but it is only the beginning of the Great Deception.
Inside this square plastic casing (which you should
never open) is a flimsy flat black plastic papadum.  If
the diskette is placed in the slot of the machine, a motor
engages the center of the disk inside and spins it around
at a great speed so that portions of it are exposed as they
pass by the oblong slot, allowing them to be “written
on” or “read” by some device inside the box.  The diskettes
that contain programs have information on them
that the computer “understands” and translates into a
number of commands that make the machine do certain
things.  The things done depend on what kind of
program is on the diskette.

            I bought a word-processing program called Framework
II.  It is quite versatile and, as I required, allows
me to create certain kinds of files in which I am able to
style the text as I wish, but I shall not go into that here.
Framework is sold by Ashton-Tate, a Silicon-Valley concern
that makes quite good programs but, like most of
the “software” companies, produces such abominable
manuals with directions for using the programs that
they have to maintain a staff of several dozen “technical
personnel” who are on duty about 12 hours a day beginning
at six in the morning (California time) merely in
order to answer the questions of confused customers.
This failing appears to be endemic to the industry: I
recently spoke with an executive of Okidata, a manufacturer
of a very good computer (laser) printer, who
told me that his technical staff answers 60,000 telephone
queries a month.  I pointed out to him that if they
made available a proper manual the number of calls
could probably be reduced to 6,000.  Only the telephone
company was profiting from such ineptitude.

            But the foregoing is all preliminary and background
to the main theme.  One of the services performed
by Framework is in a program subroutine
called Spelling Check.  I do not need a spelling checker,
but I have found it extremeely useful as a means for
proofreading text that has been keyboarded into storage
in the Framework program.  The way it works is
this: after completing an article, chapter of a book, or
whatever it is that I am working on, I press a few keys
and the program automatically scans every word of
text, comparing each with a “dictionary” contained in
the program.  It is not really a dictionary, of course, in
the sense that is lacks definitions; it is merely a word
list.  I have not seen the word list, but, from the directory
of programs I can invoke on the monitor, I know it
contains about 223,000 characters, or about 37,000
words.  Being a computer, the machine performs this
comparison checking very, very rapidly: it takes only a
minute to “proofread” a file containing about 7,000
words.  The proofreading is slightly moronic, for the
program cannot alert the user to an error like “an” for
“and,” because “an” is a valid word in its memory; still,
it is better than nothing.  If it encounters a word that is
not in its repertoire, it offers a choice of actions: at the
stroke of a key or two you can ADD the word to the list;
GO ON and ignore the word entirely; or EDIT the questionable
item (by correcting a typo, for instance).
There is another option called, SUGGEST, which, if invoked,
lists up to seven or eight words that you might
have had in mind when you wrote the one that offended
the machine, and this brings me to the point of
this article.

            It seems unnecessary to point out that Framework
cannot have a very sophisticated list of words if it has
only 37,000 in its memory, but I thought it might be
interesting to see what substitutions were evoked by
SUGGEST.  In each listing below, the boldface word is
the word at which Framework stopped, offering to
SUGGEST a substitute; the words following are the substitutions
it suggested.  Where ellipses occur, I have not
bothered to copy down the entire list of offerings, selecting
only those that struck me as odd, either because
of the incongruity of the choice or because I could not,
in the wildest flights of dyslexic, schizophrenic-fancy,
imagine the criteria employed in arriving at the selections.
I am fully aware that some of the words in my
text are not everyday items you find about the house,
but I included those anyway; attention is drawn, particularly,
to the suggestions for the more common
words.



arthropods - arthropod, arthritis, arthritides, Orthodox,
arthritic

gallium - galling, gleam, galleon, gulling, gallon,
gelling, gullying, gamily

thermionic - sermonic, thorniness, sermonize,
thermoset, theorematic, thermometer

interstellar - interstate, interstitial, interstice, interceder,
underscore, understate

q.v. - TV

caecum - chicane, cocaine, cocoon, caucus,
caching, cactus, coaching

Myriapoda - moribund, morbidly, marriageable,
marigolds, moratoria, marauding

vermiform - forevermore, Vermonter, verifiers,
vermicular, formicary, forefinger

neuromuscular - murmurously

nucleic - nucleate, nutlike, neglect, knuckled,
nutlet, nickeled, niggled

streptococcus - stereopticons, scrupulosities, stroboscopes

staphylococcus - sycophantically, sycophantishly

lakeside-lattice, legislate, legalized, localized,
leakiest, ladyship, regicide

Algonquian - Eglantine, Halogenating, Accounting,
Eglantines, Ugandans, Accountant

yellowjackets - illogicality, illogicalities

unmanageable - unimaginable, manageable, inimitable,
manageably, amendable

breastfeeding - breathtaking

horseracing - resurfacing, reassuring

childbearing - ...chalkboards

unemotional - ...emanational, unmentionable,
unanimously

nonflammable - mentionable, nonviolently, monosyllable,
nonvolatile

reawakens - weakens, wakens, reddens, rattans,
weaklings, walk-ins, walk-ons

Beaujolais - beguiles, bobtails, beauteous, bodiless,
beauties, bellicose

Bordeaux - burdocks, bureaux, broadax, paradox,
birdseed, bordellos, birdhouse
            

            ...Well, you get the idea.  I had some fun substituting
the program's words in my sentences and in simple
sentences, too.  For instance,



All arachnids and insects are arthritic.

Scientists at NASA are developing an interstate
rocket that will take 20 light-years to complete
its journey.

They removed his formicary appendix.  (No wonder
he acted as if he had ants in his pants!)

Some children are unimaginable at the age of
five.

Why is she still breathtaking when her child is
already four?

Steve Cauthens has devoted his life to resurfacing.

The prisoner was unmentionable when the verdict
was read out.

I certainly do enjoy some bordellos or beauties
with my steak.
            

            As if the preceding were not enough, I also noticed,
assuming that the program did not stop and
offer choices if the word was in its memory, that oligopsony
is in, but psychoneurotic is not; Winston is in,
Churchill is not; isosceles is in, scalene is not.

            It is a good thing that the technical staff at
MicroSoft is not being asked to field questions about its
Spelling Check; I am not sure I would want to hear the
answers.

            Finally, it might be worth mentioning that the
program has the capacity to store in a temporary
memory buffer about 100 words (proper names, for
instance) that it has identified as not stored in its dictionary.
The first time such a word is encountered, if
the operator chooses GO ON, the program stores it and
will recognize it when it recurs, obviating the need to
repeat the GO ON command.  For example, if you are
writing an article on Churchill , not listed in the
37,000-entry dictionary, the program will stop at the
first encounter; but once you have signaled it to GO ON,
it will pass over any further repetitions of Churchill .
When the temporary memory has been filled, the following
message appears on the screen, which makes
me wonder why I am relying on the program at all:



NO FURTHER WORDS CAN BE REMEMBERED FOR CORRECT
MULTIPLE OCCURRANCES OR FOR GO ON.

Spelling check, check thyself!
            

         
         
            
“In court, a prime CBS objective will be to refute characterizations
of Adams by Westmoreland's witnesses as a
rouge elephant within the CIA.”  [From The Philadelphia
Inquirer , . Submitted by 
.]
         
         
            
“John James Audubon led an extraordinary life and
enjoyed making cryptic comments about rumors that he
was, in fact, the Lost Dolphin.”  [From an exhibition catalog,
Florida Painters: Past and Present , produced by the St.
Petersburg Historical Society, .  Submitted by 
.]
         
         
            
“How to protect your neighborhood against crime and
Jennifer Beals, star of `The Bride.'  Live at Five.”  [From a
tease on CBS-TV (New York), .  Submitted by
.]
         
         
            
“We're going to need community cooperation so we can
strive for parody.  If you use it, you pay for it.”  [From
an article by Charles Moore, Albuquerque Journal , .  Submitted by .]
         
         
            
“An owner of a Greenwich Village barbershop survived
being shot in the neck as he slept by a gunman who broke
into his house....”  [From The New York Times , .  Submitted by .]
         
         
            
“A crowd of only 22,449, including 7,613 no-shows,
watched as the Cardinals broke a three-game losing streak.”
[ Newsday , .  Submitted by .]
         
         
            
“Last weekend, the Welcome Society, composed of original
Penn colony settlers, held its annual meeting....”  [ The
Philadelphia Inquirer , .  Submitted by .]